.TH envctrl 1

.SH NAME

envctrl \- Run a command in a controlled environment.

.SH SYNOPSIS

.P
.B envctrl
[\fB-c\fR]
[\fB-C\fR]
[\fB-d\fIdir\fR]
[\fB-e\fIprofile\fR]
[\fB-E\fIenvctrl-path\fR]
[\fB-f\fIoptfile\fR]
[\fB-g\fIgroup\fR]
[\fB-H\fIhost\fR]
[\fB-m\fIumask\fR]
[\fB-n\fIname\fR]
[\fB-u\fIuser\fR]
[\fIcommand\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION

.P
The
.B envctrl
script invokes a shell
.I command
in a controlled environment.
The environment is controlled by
.I environment profiles
that set up services prior to invoking the shell command, and tearing them
down again afterwards.
Environment profiles are Bourne Shell scripts, specified by the user, that
are sourced by the
.B envctrl
script.

.P
Certain of the user's environment variables can also be stripped away from the
environment in which the
.I command
runs.
This is useful to prevent interactions that unknown environment variables may
have on the command.
Variables that are left alone are:
DISPLAY, EDITOR, HOME, HZ, LOGNAME, MAIL, MAILCHECK, NNTPSERVER, OPTIND,
PAGER, PPID, PRINTER, PWD, SHELL, TERM, TZ, USER, VISUAL, and ~ (tilde).
(These variables may be unset by the environment profile itself, of
course.)
On Unix, the IFS, PATH, PS1, PS2, PS3, and PS4 environment variables are
set with the following default values:

.RS .5i
IFS = space, tab, newline
.br
PATH = /usr/bin:/bin
.br
PS1 = $
.br
PS2 = >
.br
PS3 = #?
.br
PS4 = +
.RE

.P
By default, the user can make
.B envctrl
program's presence known to the
.I command
by setting some well-known environment variables.
This is useful if the user invokes a new command shell, and wishes to retain
certain features of his usual environment (e.g. command aliases).
For these settings, see the
.B ENVIRONMENT
section below.

.P
In addition to the environment profile, other aspects that the user can
control about the
.I command
are:
UID of the user as which the command runs (if the user is the super-user),
primary GID of the process running the
.I command
(if the user is a member of that group or the super-user,
and the
.B sg(1)
command is available),
the umask,
and the host on which the command runs.

.P
When invoking the
.I command
on a remote host, the user
(the user identified with the
.BI -u user
option, or the invoking user's identity if not the super-user)
must be able to spawn a remote command using the Secure Shell program (ssh),
without giving their password.

.P
Here is the order in which the
.B envctrl
script performs its tasks:

.RS .5i
.P
Change user identity as specified.
.br
Invoke a remote shell if needed.
.br
Change primary group as specified.
.br
Clean the environment as directed.
.br
Set the present working directory as specified.
.br
Source the environment profile in setup mode.
.br
Set the umask as specified.
.br
Invoke the user's command or shell, as directed.
.br
Source the environment profile in teardown mode.
.RE

.P
The environment profile is sourced three times:
First to identify environment variables to preserve, then to set up the
desired environment, and finally to tear it down.

.P
During the first (preserve) phase, the first command line argument ($1)
is set to "preserve".
The environment profile is invoked within a subprocess and is expected to
list to its stdout stream the names of environment variables to preserve.
Its exit status is ignored.

.P
During the setup phase, the first command line argument ($1) is set to
"start".
The environment profile may set environment variables, allocate resources,
create configuration files, start servers, and so on.

.P
During the teardown phase, the first command line argument ($1) is set
to "stop".
The environment profile is expected to reverse the effects of the setup
phase, such as stopping servers and freeing additional resources.

.P
Any profile that does more than set the values of environment variables
must test its first command line argument and perform the expected tasks.
Note that features added in the future may invoke the environment profile
additional times with the first command line argument set to other values.
The author of environment profiles should guard their code accordingly.

.P
Before the environment profile is sourced for the setup phase, a trap is
set to source it for the teardown phase.
The trap is invoked upon an exit of the
.I command
(or the
.B envctrl
script itself) and the HUP, INT, QUIT, and TERM signals.
In the event that an environment profile encounters an error during the
setup phase, it can perform a normal exit and it will again be sourced
in the teardown protocol.

.P
Predefined configurations can be set up by writing most of the
.B envctrl
command line arguments into a file and referring to them by name.
The configuration file is identified by the
.BI -f optfile
argument.
The named configuration is identified by the
.BI -n name
argument.
By default, the name of the configuration file is
.B envctrl.dat
and it's located either in the same directory as the
.B envctrl
program, or in a directory named
.B lib
that is a sibling of the directory containing the
.B envctrl
program.
The host, group, umask, user, environment profile, working directory, and
location of the envctrl program can all be specified by the file;
the shell command, the name of the file itself, a configuration name, and
.B -c
and
.B -C
options cannot be set in the file.

.P
Each line of the configuration file has this format:

.P
.RS .5i
.I name
.I host
.I group
.I umask
.I user
.I environment
.I directory
.I envctrl
.RE

.P
The
.I name
field contains the name of the predefined configuration.
The
.I host
field contains the host on which the shell command runs.
The
.I group
field contains the configuration's primary group.
The
.I umask
field contains the configuration's umask.
The
.I user
field contains the configuration's user ID.
The
.I environment
field contains the fullpath to the configuration's environment profile.
The
.I directory
field contains the fullpath to the working directory at the time the
shell command is invoked.
The
.I envctrl
field contains the location of the
.B envctrl
program itself on the host on which the shell command is invoked.

.P
Command line arguments override their counterparts in predefined
configurations.
Arguments omitted from the end of a line in the configuration file assume
their default values.
Default values for fields within the configuration file may be specified
explicitly by placing a hyphen (-) in the field.
In the event that more than one line in the
.I optfile
match the given
.IR name ,
the first match is used.
Fields may be quoted with single- or double-quotes.


.SH OPTIONS

.IP -c .5i
Clean the environment.
That is, unset all environment variables except for a few well-known
innocuous ones and those that are required for proper shell operations,
and those preserved by the environment profile.

.IP -C .5i
Do not set the
.B envctrl
well-known environment variables.

.IP [\fB-d\fIdir\fR]
Specifies the present working directory in which the
.I command
executes.
Note that, in combination with the
.BI -H host
option, this directory must exist on both the local and remote hosts.
Defaults to the present working directory in which
.B envctrl
is invoked.

.IP [\fB-e\fIprofile\fR]
Specifies the environment profile in which the
.I command
is run.
Default is to load no environment profile, inheriting the user's environment
in which the
.I command
runs.

.IP [\fB-E\fIenvctrl-path\fR]
Specifies an alternate path to the
.B envctrl
program, to be used when spawning a command on a remote host with dissimilarly
configured operating system from that of the local host.

.IP [\fB-f\fIoptfile\fR]
Specifies a file that contains predefined named configurations.
This file is interpreted on the host on which the
.B envctrl
program is run.
The default is named
.B envctrl.dat
in the same directory as the one containing the
.B envctrl
program, or in a directory named
.B lib
that is sibling to it.

.IP [\fB-g\fIgroup\fR]
The primary group of the process running the
.IR command .
Defaults to the user's primary group.

.IP [\fB-H\fIhost\fR]
Specifies the host on which the
.I command
is invoked.
Defaults to the host invoking the
.B envctrl
script.

.IP [\fB-m\fIumask\fR]
The umask of the process running the
.IR command .
Defaults to the user's umask.

.IP [\fB-n\fIname\fR]
Identifies a predefined named configuration contained in the configuration
file specified with the
.BI -f optfile
argument.

.IP [\fB-u\fIuser\fR]
The identity of the user to invoke the
.IR command .
The default is the user's identity.
This option has effect only if the user is the super-user.

.IP \fIcommand\fR
The command to be invoked by the
.B envctrl
script.
Defaults to the user's shell, or /bin/sh if it cannot be determined.


.SH ENVIRONMENT

.P
The following environment variables are normally set by the
.B envctrl
program, but may be defeated by giving the
.B -C
option on the command line:

.IP ENVCTRL_CMD .5i
This is the
.I command
to be invoked as specified on the
.B envctrl
command line.
.IP ENVCTRL_DIR .5i
This is the directory in which the
.I command
is invoked.
.IP ENVCTRL_PROFILE .5i
This is the name of the environment profile specified on the
command line.
.IP ENVCTRL_RUNNING .5i
This is set to "1" by the
.B envctrl
program.
It is useful to test the existence of this variable in a .cshrc file
to set up things like command aliases and history, without affecting
other aspects of the profiled environment when a shell is invoked
by the
.B envctrl
program.

.SH BUGS

.P
The
.B envctrl
script relies on the
.B envclean
script to unset existing environment variables.
A side-effect of the
.B envclean
script is that file descriptor 3 is redirected to the null device
(/dev/null).

.P
The
.BI -g group
command line option works only if the
.BR sg (1)
program is available on the host running the
.IR command .
That program is part of the Linux shadow password package.
The
.BR newgrp (1)
command has limitations that preclude its use by
.BR envctrl .

.SH SEE ALSO

.P
env(1)
.br
envclean(1)
.br
sg(1)
.br
ssh(1)
.br
sh(1)
.br
su(1)
.br
umask(2)


.SH AUTHOR

.P
This script was placed in the pubic domain by its author, Paul Sander
(paul@wakawaka.com).
